[Music]
so let's shift gears a little bit now and have
a look at the parallels between what we're doing
here and this ordinal Theory from Modern St
Theory okay so we have to say something a
little bit about set theory and I warn you
in advance that if you're a big fan of set
theory you may be dismayed by what I'm going to
say here but it's probably not something new to
most of you okay I think that modern set theory
is highly problematic logically that in fact if
you look carefully it becomes self-evident that
this Theory does not work and it's only sustained
by our generally Universal agreement that
we're not going to look at the elephant in the
corner so modern set theory pretends that there
is a theory of sets it's a pretense without a
proper definition of the term set it does not
actually sit down and say what exactly a set
is and this is ultimately the core problem
with modern set theory it really is at this
very fundamental level that if you're going
to talk about groups you have to Define what
a group is if you're going to talk about Fields
you have to say what a field is if you're going
to talk about differentiable manifolds you have
to say what a differentiable manifold is that's
the way mathematics is it starts with definitions
but set theory does not do that it tries to avoid
defining completely clearly and precisely what
the fundamental term is of course informally
we have an intuitive understanding because the
word set is used in English language we can look
up a thesaurus or a dictionary and find lots of
more less synonymous words words like collection
family Bunch Menagerie grouping I've talked about
this before in previous videos so we have a whole
bunch of words at our disposal so that we can at
least informally say well a set is a collection
of such and such or it's a gathering of such and
such or it's a number of such and such you know
we we can do that but it's clear that we're just
transferring the burden of definition from one
one word to another it's not really solving the
problem okay so that's informally so informally
we have this intuitive understanding but formally
modern set theory proceeds by considering set to
be an undefined term so it pretends that in fact
we don't know what a set is and we don't need to
know it's an undefined term which is subject
to rules or axioms which replace theorems so
instead of having a proper definition upon
which theorems are then created and proven
we've decided to not Define what the word set
precisely means and so the various facts about
sets which would ordinarily be theorems if this
was any other mathematical subject are replaced
with rules axioms things that you believe in
because you're told to believe them or perhaps
because you believe that they correspond to your
intuition about what ought to be true assuming
that your intuition actually reflects something
valid what's really happened though people don't
want to say it this way but this is really close
to the truth is that philosophy has come to the
rescue of modern mathematical foundations the
mathematicians themselves were not able to
create a proper framework for set theory they
tried but it didn't work it failed in a very
embarrassing and flamboyant way in fact and then
the philosophers were kind of recruited they were
brought in and they created this essentially
philosophical framework really is what it is
um which is now the underpinnings not of just
Seth Theory but remarkably of supposedly all of
pure mathematics absolutely incredible State of
Affairs people absolutely incredible and future
Generations are going to shake their heads in
disbelief at what we've gotten up to and what
we've allowed to pass as a proper foundations
for the subject so why did modern set theory go
down this road why this Retreat from proper
definitions I'm going to be explaining the
history of this in some detail this year we're
going to have to have a very close look at this
whole story we're going to look at the axioms very
precisely and carefully and critically and we're
going to unravel the whole logical knot so it's
not just the definition of sets themselves which
are missing from the current theory but pretty
well all the other adjacent terms are also sort
of imposed without proper definitions such as for
example element Union power set intersection okay
so none of these terms are pinned down precisely
and you might say well why did people do this this
is clearly not a very desirable State of Affairs
so what motivated mathematicians to accept this
and the simple reason is the following is that
if you accept Canter's definition so here was
Canter's original definition of what a set is
a set is a gathering together into a hole of
definite distinct objects of our perception or of
our thought which are called elements of the set
all right so if you are going to accept this as a
definition of set then you have serious problems
because this is just not precise enough what are
objects of our perception or of our thought and
you've already seen me give various lists of
suitably ambiguous kinds of sets and do they
really deserve to be called sets or don't they
but the fundamental problem is already at this
level here which is really sort of at the level of
a a 10-year-old objection right if you're going to
just allow yourself to think up sets like I'm
thinking of certain things the set of all fish
called Fred okay that's a set because I'm thinking
of it the set of all happy thoughts yes that's a
set because it's something that I'm thinking about
so if we play this game then even primary school
children can easily come up with ever more and
more outlandish sets and eventually some kid is
going to say hey I've got a set that will beat
everybody else's set how about the set of all
sets Okay it's not uh particularly brilliant
insight to suggest that we should consider
this right if you're going to consider sets of
anything then how about the set of all sets and
this is really the fundamental core problem it's
the fact that you can create a phrase like this to
create an object which is almost self-evidently
contradictory or at least highly dubious here's
a set youu and it's got every single possible
set you could possibly imagine the set of all
fish call Fred is in there the set of all happy
thoughts is in there because this contains all
possible sets including you itself because you
is a set and so it belongs to the set of all
sets Okay but that means that inside this youu
if we look more carefully ah there's another U
inside this copy of you and inside that there's
another copy of you and in fact this U is sitting
inside some bigger thing which is also youu and
so this is infinite digress in both directions
and I think most reasonable people would say guys
you have cross the line into nonsense it doesn't
work this is silly you're obviously going to be
faced with self-referential problems here okay
so people generally think that it's because of
Berton Russell's Paradox that set theory collapse
but in fact it's really just the ambiguity in the
definition of caner that even at this level here
which is I think a essentially like a 10-year-old
kind of idea you can see that this is not going to
work right there's something seriously logically
problematic with trying to conjure up set theory
when you're only going to have something that's
so vague like this as your fundamental definition
okay so I realize that people are going to kick
and scream about this analysts are going to be
loathed to accept this because they all know that
modern analysis is built on a foundation of set
theory that's the ultimate justification ation
for our model of the Continuum as real numbers
and without real numbers most of modern analysis
is very seriously weakened so there's going to
be strong resistance to actually even addressing
this entire issue most analysts would just rather
not think about the problems with set theory
in fact most mathematicians would prefer not to
think about the problems but the problems are are
there they're very serious and there is a better
way so we are going to point to a better way but
there's a lot more to be said about that and I
will be talking at length about this entire issue
so now let's go to Cardinal and ordinal numbers
which are part of this modern set theory which
we don't believe in we don't believe in Cardinal
and ordinal numbers so neither of these are proper
mathematical theories in my view but nevertheless
let's have a look at the standard story of
ordinals in particular so here's a relatively
simple quick introduction to ordinals sometimes
also called the theory of well-ordered sets
Okay so I'm going to just show you the standard
hierarchy of ordinals so we start with the empty
set so everything is a set in this Theory that's
maybe important to say so everything we're going
to consider from now on is going to be a set when
we're regarding ordinals and the simplest possible
set is the empty set fair enough and that's going
to be given a name we're going to call that zero
that's going to be our representation of zero and
that's certainly not unreasonable I perfectly buy
that and then we have to build up numbers from
that and the idea is to build up numbers by just
looking at sets of sets possibly of sets and so
on so the simplest set that we can build from the
empty set is a single set whose sole element is
the empty set so it's the set consisting of zero
and let me note that the set consisting of zero
which is this thing here can also be written as
o Union this set because o is the empty set and
empty set Union anything is just this thing here
all right now the number two is defined to be
one Union the set one so it's a new set which is
a union of two existing sets the first set is the
set which is one and then the next set is the set
which contains one so here is this Union so it's
a big set and it's got one element there which is
the element from one and then the other element
here is actually this entire set so this is the
union of the set one and the set consisting
of of one as a sole element please check to
see that you agree with that and then three
is defined as two Union the set two so two is
a set namely it's this set right here and then we
take the union of that set with the set consisting
of just the element two all right and here you
see all of this put together so uh we're taking
the union of of this which is that part there
together with the set two and uh there's the set
two okay notice that I'm reverting to standard
notation here for sets so I'm using uh commas
because this is traditional treatment so a
standard set theorist would look at this and
say yes this is the usual way that we build up
natural numbers from sets essentially from just
the empty set and constructions with sets so all
of these sets that we've constructed so far 0 1
2 3 and so on they are all called ordinals
and the pattern that we've used to go from
0 to one and then from 1 to two and from two to
three and so on can be generalized to define the
successor of any ordinal so if Alpha is any
ordinal then its successor Alpha Prime which
we you can also write as Alpha + 1 is defined by
well here's that rule that we've seen Alpha Prime
is the union of the ordinal Alpha together
with the set consisting of one element that
element being Alpha all right so this is a set
that's a set we're taking the union of those to
create another ordinal which is the successor
of whatever ordinal Alpha we started with okay
so this is actually then a perfectly logical
if complicated way of constructing the natural
numbers using only finite set theory I have no
objections with this as a framework for natural
numbers I think it's not the most efficient way
um I think that it's definitely constrained by
having this idea that sets are the right data
structures to use we know that there are these
other data structures that are around namely lists
and ordered sets and a particular multi sets in
addition to sets and having these four different
types of data structures around provides us with
more flexibility so we are going to in fact be
looking at something like this but we're going
to be doing it in a different way because we're
not constrained to just stick with sets but if
you were constrained to stick with sets then
this would be a Perfectly Natural in fact uh
reasonable and somewhat clever way of creating
natural numbers from set theory and this is I
think basically attributed to John Van noyman
a brilliant American mathematician of the 20th
century okay so we have now a way of constructing
natural numbers including zero so 0 1 2 3 so on
they're all sets they're all things we call
ordinals and okay we have a sort of inductive
way of getting from one to the next one so far
so good all right so now for the dubious part of
the construction of ordinals the idea of taking
limits of ordinance so suppose we have alpha 1
Alpha 2 Alpha 3 and so on a sequence of ordinals
so we have some rule that generates what we
consider a nice sequence of ordinals or a suitable
sequence okay then their limit is defined to be
they Union alpha 1 Union Alpha 2 Union Alpha
3 Union Alpha 4 and so on we could call that
Alpha Infinity so this is a way of starting with
a sequence of ordinals and taking some limit of
that sequence and it's analogous to the kind of
limit that we were using uh in our construction of
operation but it's quite different so for example
if we consider the sequence 0 1 2 3 sort of the
fundamental sequence of natural numbers themselves
or just our basic ordinals then we get the limit
ordinal right so each of these are sets in fact
each is a subset of the next one so when we take
the limit we get the set Zer comma 1 comma 2 comma
3 and so on what we're getting when we take the
union of all of these things is an infinite set
and here is where the problem really arises all
right the problem is that if there's an infinite
number of elements in your sequence then you're
asking to take a union of those infinite number of
sets and that's simply something that you cannot
do that's the basic problem you cannot do that
you you can take the union between two sets and
then if you repeat that you can take the union of
three sets you repeat that you can take the union
of four sets fine but you cannot take the union
of an infinite number of sets it's not actually
even defined so I hope we can appreciate the
difficulties here because these three little dots
which represent the union all the other natural
numbers we know that this is hugely problematic
because we have now some experience with numbers
which are considerably bigger than just 1 2 3 we
know that this seemingly simple minded pattern one
number followed by the next followed by the next
doesn't in fact really represent what's going
on here along the way here are things like Zed
and then Zed Prime and then like that number
three star N4 that we started to write down an
expression for and in between 0123 and Zed and Zed
Prime and this big number are unold numbers which
cannot be written down in our universe because
they are too big these are numbers whose existence
is problematic and that's not to speak of at all
all the numbers supposedly which are Beyond even
that biggest number that we contemplated and
even numbers which are so big that you cannot
write down any expression for them at all in the
universe So eventually the universe is only so big
eventually you just run out of possible numbers
that you can write down in the universe it's only
a finite number we don't know how many but there's
upper bound okay but we're pretending that none
of that applies here that we're just closing
our eyes to the reality of of mathematics as
it really is and pretending that this little
sequence keeps on going in its simple-minded
fashion and that therefore we have all of the
natural numbers in one big set and that's going
to be a new object which we're going to call the
orinal Omega that's the heart of the problem right
there the heart of the problem is already at
Omega this object does not make sense simple as
that but the set theorists pretend that
it does because it sort of coincides with
Canter's vague prescription well we can
think about all the natural numbers and
because we can think about them we
can put them all in a box okay so
now the idea is that using successors
and limits set theorists now construct
a hierarchy of ordinals so this is just
the beginning and now by combining these
two operations we can build Higher and Higher
and bigger and bigger ordinals which somewhat
surprisingly has a remarkable similarity to our
hierarchy of arithmetical operations the star
lambdas even though these are quite different
objects and even though this is in my view
highly dubious logically nevertheless there's
a very close parallel to what's going on so
for example once we have omega we can talk about
Omega plus 1 which is the successor of Omega and
by definition that's the set Omega Union the set
Omega okay well what does that look like well here
is the union so there's Omega and there is that
set containing Omega and we've taken the union or
we could sometimes write it like this so here's
sequence 0 1 2 dot dot dot representing all the
natural numbers there and then there's a little
colon with an Omega afterwards representing the
fact that after you've put in all the natural
numbers you finished that task closed off the
sequence with a little semicolon and then you
add Omega itself Omega then being the same kind
of big thing all right so that's the successor
of Omega and then we can take omega plus 2 which
is the successor of Omega + 1 which is Omega +
1 Union the set Omega + 1 and we get something
that looks like this and we can carry on and then
once we have these guys here then there's a limit
procedure that we can can take and then we can
take the union and we'll get to Omega which looks
like this then it has a infinite sequence of the
sort of first level ordinals just natural numbers
and then these sort of second level fellows Omega
Omega plus 1 Omega plus 2 Etc and there's another
infinite sequence of those okay so then the story
continues and it's very parallel to the kind of
picture that we were drawing except that the
crucial role of limit has changed dramatically the
objects that we're considering are quite different
we're talking about infinite sets here whereas we
were talking about operations between natural
numbers right and here this limiting operation
involves doing an infinite number of things for us
that's not the case for us the limiting operation
involves writing down a formula that allows us
to compute very concretely and specifically if
in a very complicated way the product of two
natural numbers so the limit of Omega 2 Omega
3 omega and so on ends up being Omega squar and
then the limit of Omega Omega squ Omega cubed
is Omega to the Omega and we get a hierarchy of
ordinals this way in fact the hierarchy extends
um much further depending on various sort
of higher constructions that you impose as
you go on so we see that there's a correspondence
between what we're calling n and what the modern
SE theorists call Omega so even though they are
very different the contexts are very different
still there's a correspondence between these two
kinds of ladders suggesting that the ladder itself
is of some kind of independent interest and has a
life of its own uh perhaps independent of ordinals
and maybe independent of operations as well and
I think that is the case it's a very interesting
object and next time I I think we want to explore
a little bit more of it so please try to get your
head around what we've done today with regard
to these higher arithmetical operations and
we're going to push further and you're going
to see how these different levels of limits
start playing an important role in determining
what kinds of sequences are suitable for taking
further limits it becomes quite interesting and
sort of self-referential in an interesting way
as well so I hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman Wildberger thanks for [Music] listening